
ICE Deportations: for New England Republicans, it’s NOT an 80-20 Issue.
By Kemler Samuels
Candidate for State House and U.S. Congress
“80-20 Issues” are the new hallmark for political pundits to note, and for political consultants to steer their candidates to elevating.  I am a volunteer consultant to all Northeast conservative candidates, and my wisdom for you is, ICE deportations are NOWHERE NEAR an 80-20 issue for New England Republicans.  
While national polling MIGHT yield a 70+ percent favorability, please remember: nationwide polling absorbs New England, a mere 6% of the U.S. population, with the 94% elsewhere.  Fervor for ICE deportations in Arizona, Texas, and Florida (together nearly 4x the population of New England) dwarfs the coolness that New England voters have.
As of mid-February 2026, ICE deportations have barely been vivid in New England.  A five-day ICE intrusion in Lewiston Maine yielded the only widely-photographed mass arrests.  Should ICE operations head to multiple New England cities in salient force, there are too many things that can go wrong.  It will animate New England opinion against these stiff-armed deportations.  Nice neighbors pulled from their homes, harsh detention of their children, scuffles at protests, and perhaps violence akin to that displayed in Minnesota all move the opinion of all but the most fervid “law-and-order” voters.
As for “law-and-order” leaders….right now, it’s not a good look.  Those leading the ICE charge are not exactly “telegenic”:
	Greg Bovino (Patton without a war), Steven Miller, Kash Patel, and Ken Paxton.
More telegenic, but also problematic
	Tom Homan (calm and seemingly warm, but view the semi-criminality for which he got a “pardon”)
	Kristi Noem (telegenic, but her fabrications in defense of “following orders” are out-of-control)
And it will get worse.  Another shooting during a deportation operation is almost inevitable.  Videos of ICE taking good-but-for-their-immigration-status men from their homes can’t possibly engender sympathy for the heavily-armed, still-masked SWAT-like teams.  Photos of a crying child without her parents well-up almost all our sympathies.  And while the cerebral can and should overwhelm policy, the emotional usually rules mass opinion.  
Meanwhile, Republican rhetoric about ICE helps a very wily (and very telegenic) Gavin Newsom bring forth the clever, manipulative acts that also animate media for him and against sensible policy.
We lost the Vietnam war largely because of images.  Our policy was rightly on the side of freedom, but the images of fire and blood overseas, and of roughed-up protesters at home, made the vast majority of Americans anti-conflict or at best unconcerned with how Vietnam was run.  If ICE images seem similar, please take heed.

A “hill to die on”?
New England Republicans especially…are federally-run deportations your “hill to die on”?  There are others to fight fervently for:
	Keeping babies alive
	Universal school choice
Pro minimizing government, and
	Ending local Democrat Party hegemony.
In 2026, state government policy should be more important than any DC policy.  DC issues are assuredly problematic, in part because Republicans in Congress are themselves divided, and in part because Trump floats a policy every month that is hard to defend.  Stick to your state and local issues.  Even if running for Congress, the last issue, about Democrats restricting our lives, taxing us wherever possible, and rewarding their specialty groups at our expense, is fulsome for weeks of podcasts and personal campaign appearances.

The RIGHT policy
Here goes.  With still fervor for the “law of the land”, even at the no-tolerance level, we can remove just as many illegals with ICE minimally on the sidelines while local police do the arrests.
When two officers gently meet an illegal child during a school lunch period, they can then call the mom saying
“Senora, your son is in our custody.  We see no evidence of his status as a “dreamer”.  Do you and your husband want to come to our station to work this out?
When two officers meet an older illegal following hospital care or clinic treatment, a call goes to the family:
“We have your abuela in custody.  She will be sent to a detention facility unless you want to be self-deporting with her.  Would you like to see us and hear your options with her?”
The Feds should reward them for good, surgical apprehensions.  That effects the “lighter touch” that President Trump recently touted.    
Local police arrests are also economical.  It costs ICE nearly $800 per official per day to work in Metro Minneapolis.  The low-end estimate is $18,000,000 a week; and the high-end estimate (from an unsupported Kristi Noem) of arrests per week is 500.  That is 
$36,000 per arrest.
So instead, how about paying that to local police, who almost certainly have better knowledge of where the illegals are and their activities.   Even paying the local PDs half that brings their precinct over $500,000 for every 30 people they turn over.
Additionally, consider Alternatives To Detention.  Detention following arrest averages nearly 50 days before deportation, costs on average $7500 more per detainee, and deprives both employer and employee of productivity.    Ankle-monitoring is effective, while showing we mean business.
Notice that the above policy and tactics apply irrespective of whether Republicans desire deportation only from post-immigration criminals or to all non-legal immigrants.  It thus bridges the “libertarian” wing among Republicans (those aroused only by criminality), the cultural conservatives, and the “law-and-order” voters.  The differences among our groups alone make this nowhere near an 80-20 issue.  Let the issue be subordinated to other pressing federal and state activities.
	

	

