
Poor government decisions caused the health insurance premium spike 

By Maine Sen. James Libby
Candidate for Governor 

When it comes to health insurance, the Affordable Care Act (ACA), the lack of tort reform, our inflating American dollar, fraud, and several other key issues have put Maine in an incredibly vulnerable position. A solution to the health insurance problem will be elusive; but American political leaders must face the challenge now – not later.
 
A presentation made to the Maine Legislature’s Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee in November tipped off lawmakers to what is coming. For the 64,678 Mainers who get their insurance from Maine’s CoverME, the state-based health care exchange operated under the ACA, health care premiums are set to increase by an average of 77% in 2026 for households receiving the federal enhanced premium tax credit (EPTC).
 
For many Maine families, it means a much larger percentage of their income will go toward health insurance premiums – that is, if they even decide to continue coverage. Those in the highest income bracket who currently receive the EPTC will lose the subsidy completely. And according to the office that oversees the Maine Health Insurance Marketplace, that could add up to tens of thousands of dollars per year.
 
One problem is the ACA, known to most as Obamacare, has been failing us for years. Higher subsidization of it through the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 and then extended by the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 only masked a problem that had been growing since ACA was first implemented in 2014. The nearly 600,000 Mainers with health insurance through an employer (including me) have already experienced the rollercoaster of double-digit rate increases over the past decade.
 
In fact, the average annual cost of insurance for single employees covered under an employer-sponsored plan was $5,571 in 2013, the year before ACA took effect. Today, that same coverage is $9,325, according to the 2025 Employer Health Benefits Survey released by KFF this year. That’s a staggering 67% increase under ACA, certainly not what we were promised by then-President Barack Obama. Unfortunately, health insurance premium increases are about to rise still higher.
 
The ACA was billed as health care reform; but it did very little besides enriching insurance companies by forcing people to purchase policies under penalty of an additional tax. Health care providers on the other side of the insurance equation can charge whatever they want because the government has subsidized their patients’ insurance premiums. It demonstrates the ACA never solved the true problem with health care – it simply became one of three major cost drivers of it.   
 
ACA has cost taxpayers dearly and has been ripe for fraud and abuse. The Government Accountability Office reported in December 2025 that millions of improper enrollments accounted for $27 billion in taxpayer losses annually. It’s simply more proof of a broken system that only drives up costs in the long run.
 
Another problem is the American dollar itself.  Recently the Federal Reserve System's M1 money supply expansion topped $19 trillion dollars, up from about $4 trillion in February 2020. The money supply was increased to accommodate interest rate cuts; and we have just experienced two rate cuts in the past two Fed meetings. The reality of this is that if all other intervening variables were held constant since 2019, health care costs will eventually more than quadruple from that 2020 date, since health care services are needs – not wants – and good healthcare is hard to find. Unfortunately, no variables held constant and upward price pressures are at severe levels.
 
If I were to advise the President on one thing, it would be to stop his well-intentioned advocacy for interest rate reduction. Rate reduction often works well by providing opportunities for consumer and industry borrowing and refinancing.  But in the current inflated environment, that strategy will help some and hurt many others. It will cause another spiral of inflation in areas of the economy where more supply of goods and services are harder to foster, which is the case with healthcare.
 
Another cost driver is that the ACA and other insurance eras failed to reform tort laws that insurance companies charge medical providers enormous premiums to cover. The lawsuit lottery condition of the United States has led to higher premiums and defensive medicine. At some point, we will need to face this problem – we have been ignoring it for decades. 
 
The ACA also didn’t address our unhealthy, aging population, force price transparency or eliminate the relic known as "certificate of need (CON)," through which states like Maine limit competition. Maine reformers will tell you that CON has been reformed but much of it is still in law. Consolidation in the industry reduces competition and has also driven up prices in sheltered markets like Maine's.
 
The impending loss of the EPTC is a problem for Maine families; but it’s one that Democrats created by increasing the subsidies to begin with. It only hid the problem and delayed the inevitable. What’s happening now is the CoverME premiums are finally catching up to what the rest of us have already endured since ACA was implemented over a decade ago.
 
The entire health insurance system is collapsing under its own weight. The solution is to reform the health care system itself by addressing each of the problems I outlined above. I was involved in doing just that when worker's compensation insurers left Maine in the early 1990s. That fix, led by Governor McKernan, was outstanding. Unfortunately, its complexities pale in comparison to the health insurance premium problem we face today.

