
Tariffs: Hurtful, especially in the northeast
By Mark Stewart Greenstein
The few who support tariffs need to start again.  I say “few” because almost nobody likes the consequences of tariffs, direct or indirect.   Many who support President Trump align to approve of tariffs simply because Trump is behind it and they are convinced he’s playing 4D chess.  Separate them, and there are few Americans who approve.  
The direct consequence of tariffs are: consumers pay more.  Or at least “more than necessary”.  If an importer really can absorb the cost of the tariff and keep a decent margin, then without the tariff, that importer COULD be offering consumers a still-lower price.
And where is the excess we lay out going?  Not to the importer.  Not to the American retailer.  It’s to the U.S. government, a very UN-worthy receiver.  Our government already taxes us too much; it does not deserve a windfall from our purchases of imported goods.  
The indirect consequence is even worse: foreign nations enact reciprocal tariffs on U.S. exports.  That has not happened in a large way yet; but all it takes is a populist leader abroad to say “I’m standing up to Trump”.  His consumers will then have THREE reasons to not buy from U.S. firms:
	•	Higher prices to them,
	•	Akin to war, they adopt “Don’t Buy American”,
	•	New manufacturers form in those nations to compete against us.
Any one of these three is devastating to American exporters.  Indirectly it hurts us all, because less money in the pockets of the employees and owners means less they can spend domestically.  And if it’s dramatically less revenue, employees get laid off.  That’s ZERO income for them and greatly reduced spending to businesses around them.
What does it take to trigger this retaliation?   For some foreign leaders it would take a lot, but if there’s anything that can supply instant international animus, it’s the not-so careful words of a bombastic U.S. President.

 If the Trump Administration REALLY Wants Tariffs, Use Congress.
Congress, should a majority in each House approve, has the sole responsibility to impose tariffs.  This comes straight from the U.S. Constitution.  The Framers did not want states competing with one another to have lower tariffs, so they added the language in Article I sec 8, that “all Duties, Imposts and Excises shall be uniform throughout the United States”.  From the outset, the Trump tariffs were an end-around. 
Why has Trump eschewed Congress thus far?  Because no Democrats and very few Republicans will vote for raised tariffs.**
The RIGHT policy
The world has known since 1776 that the wealth of nations (ours and theirs) increases with free trade.  Mercantilism is jingoistic and can lead to war.  Even when it doesn’t lead to war, it punishes consumers.  A few leaders look tough on video while the rest of us suffer.  
I am a candidate for Congress, a liberty-minded Independent.  That’s neither left nor right (we call liberty-mindedness “above”).  If elected, citizens can count on my vote to be a steadfast “no” on tariffs.  They are unwise.  Even if the revenue dramatically brought down the debt (it doesn’t; $200 B wind-drift barely makes a dent in a $38,000 B mountain of debt) tariffs are bad.  Tariffs act as a tax on us.  
I will never vote to use a tariff as a weapon to prod a foreign nation’s policy change.  We have enough clout and enough financial tools, from freezing foreign assets to outright urges to boycott sales, to propel change.  Unless a nation truly deserves a financial sanction, let American businesses and American consumers trade with their businesses, and don’t put upon us a tax every time we buy Italian shoes, Moroccan shirts, Chinese toys, Colombian coffee, or New Zealand fruit.
With six Supreme Court Justices voting against him, our President now looks to administrative loopholes and legal interpretations to do what’s not right in the first place.  He should let it go.  I’m Donald Trump’s ally on many things.  He’s shown by effective use of the military that he can move nations toward compliance; he does not need a punitive tariff regime to do so.

** Only 11 states have a positive trade balance; nine are politically “red”, led by oil exporter Louisiana.  None is in the northeast; even the Congressional Republicans from the other 39 states would likely vote against raised tariffs.  Indeed, one of the worst trade-deficit states, just behind the two biggest “losers”, New Jersey and Tennessee, is MICHIGAN.  Yes, producers of the most expensive items consumers can buy, Michigan’s trucks and cars are virtually off-limits to international buyers, so high are THEIR protective tariffs against U.S. car manufacturers.

